# text-simplification-slovene

To increase the accessibility and diversity of easy reading in Slovenian, we created a prototype system that automatically simplifies texts. This is the first system for automatically converting Slovenian sentences and texts into a simpler form. We have prepared a dataset for the Slovenian language that contains aligned simple and complex sentences, which can be used for further development of models for simplifying texts in Slovenian. We used the T5 model for the Slovenian language, which is learned on other tasks in the field of natural language processing. Namely, the model uses machine learning with knowledge transfer. It uses deep neural networks with an encoder-decoder architecture. To find the optimal values of hyperparameters and evaluate the performance of the system, we used automatic measures ROUGE and BERTScore, which are quite high and indicate a high performance of the system. 

Za povečanje dostopnosti in raznovrstnosti lahkega branja v slovenščini, smo izdelali prototip sistema, ki avtomatsko poenostavlja besedila. To je prvi sistem za samodejno pretvarjanje slovenskih povedi in besedil v enostavnejšo obliko. Pripravili smo podatkovno množico za slovenski jezik s poravnanimi enostavnimi in kompleksnimi stavki, ki se jo bo lahko uporabilo za nadaljne razvijanje modelov za poenostavljanje besedil v slovenščini. Uporabili smo model T5 za slovenski jezik, ki je naučen na drugih nalogah iz področja naravne obdelave jezika. Model namreč uporablja strojno učenje s prenosom znanja. Uporablja globoke nevronske mreže z arhitekturo kodirnik-dekodirnik. Za iskanje optimalnih vrednosti hiperparametrov in evalvacijo uspešnosti sistema smo uporabili avtomatske mere ROUGE in BERTScore, ki so dokaj visoke in kažejo na visoko uspešnost sistema.
